we can skate because of another quality
of ice its slipperiness
this may seem completely normal
but it's actually very rare for a solid
[Music]
the reason we can skate is to do with
what happens when ice is squeezed by a
blade the way it reacts to pressure
[Music]
so Andrea Sara and I are going to put
ice under a lot of pressure in a classic
experiment okay we lift it up and we'll
get it onto our platform it is pretty
heavy I'm starting it right good
here we are so now we need to unpack
things perfect that's great
and so what we're gonna do is we're
gonna sling this wire over the top and
hang these two really rather heavy
weights we're talking about seven kilos
here there abouts and there we go
so it's now suspended what we now have
to do is wait for the pressure of the
wire to work its magic on the ice as we
wait the while works its way through the
ice almost cutting it in two and behind
the wire the ice is sealing up again
something very strange is going on look
at it so how's it going through the ice
like this well of course the wire has
the weight on it and because the wire is
very thin what it does is it applies
really quite a large pressure on a local
area of the ice now we know that ice
expands when it freezes and so if you
squeeze it then you can actually drive
it back towards that molten State so in
other words when you when you put
pressure on it it turns it back to water
you can remelt it back to water
that's one of the key reasons we can
skate the pressure of the blades is
enough to melt the top layer of ice into
water which lubricates the skates
friction can also help melt the ice
in our experiment as the wire passes
through the block the ice sealed up
behind this shows how ice can engulf
something solid
leaving barely a trace I was expecting
that the wires just to cut through it
and it feels it's completely seals it
looks as if it ought to just fall apart
now in it it's quite an extraordinary
process that effectively underneath the
wire the ice melts and then behind it it
refreezes again so this whole process is
actually is making the ice moved between
those two points on that knife fight
between liquid and solid you put the
pressure on that squeezes it take the
pressure off and it freezes again
absolutely this formidable ability to
swallow up another solid is a real
insight into just how peculiar
ices
you